Conference Call with RIM
########################
:date: 2012-06-14 12:12
:author: Xitij Ritesh Patel
:category: Ventures
:tags: blackberry, desktop bridge

I mentioned at the end of `A Desktop Bridge Too Far`_ that I had
participated in a conference call with RIM about many of the concerns
that I had raised. I'll try to summarize what was discussed.

Communications Issues
---------------------

When Desktop Bridge was first submitted, it was reviewed by the App
World team that is responsible for approving apps. Due to Desktop
Bridge's functionality, it was flagged for further review by another,
separate team. The first time that the app was approved, it was pulled
back to allow the internal team additional time to review Desktop
Bridge.

I threw a kink in the chain when I submitted another revision. It seems
that the App World team continued about their regular business, not
completely aware of what the internal security review team was doing.
The App World team reapproved my app before the internal team could flag
it again, which is what led to the issues I ran into.

RIM admitted that the internal team could have moved faster towards
making a decision, and improved their communications with both the App
World team, and myself. I identified that there needs to be greater
transparency into the process, and they agreed. They assured me they
will take steps to rectify these issues.

Some time before BlackBerry 10 is released, they are planning to release
a document with guidelines on what they are looking for in the app
approval process. They have their own internal documents, but they
aren't suitable for public consumption. I was assured that we should see
this sooner, rather than later.

App World Security
------------------

RIM assured me that they are well aware of the issue and take it quite
seriously. They have taken steps to rectify the problem, and we should
likely see a solution in place some time this summer, well before
BlackBerry 10 is released. Personally, I'd like to see a more definite
timeline.

Quality Assurance
-----------------

We had a pretty good discussion about this issue. Currently, RIM's App
World team receives an app, and checks its content and metadata to
ensure it doesn't violate any of the agreements or terms. Then the app
is put through a number of tests to ensure it runs and doesn't cause the
device to malfunction (e.g. blow up). Functional testing is not done, as
the app's functionality is left to the developer.

However, additional functional testing is something that RIM has
considered. While a poorly functioning app does reflect poorly on the
developer, it does affect the perception of App World's quality as well.
Functional tests could be introduced via automation, but it's difficult
to conduct with several 1000s of different types of apps. Moreover, they
need to balance this with the goal of reducing approval times and the
impact on the developer. It is not an easy problem to solve, and I'm not
sure either of us had a good solution.

All of this would be separate from the quality certification process, as
that would likely be handled by an external team. Since most apps would
not be reviewed for quality certification, it allows some room for
additional testing to be done. Again, what that testing would be is
still unknown.

.. _A Desktop Bridge Too Far: http://www.xitijpatel.com/2012/06/a-desktop-bridge-too-far/
